VTF monitoring driver (#29293)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/drivers/vtf_monitoring.rst

.. _vtf_monitoring:

VTF monitoring driver
#####################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The VTF (Voltage-Temperature-Frequency) monitoring driver fetches and stores data that the nRF Wi-Fi driver uses to trigger re-calibrations or re-configurations of the Wi-Fi® subsystem.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The driver maintains a periodic snapshot of the following three channels:

* Battery voltage - Supply voltage in millivolts (mV).
* Die temperature - SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00°C.
* XO frequency offset - Crystal oscillator frequency offset in parts per million (ppm).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Configuration
*************

Enable the monitoring system and select live or fixed channel data through Kconfig options.

Monitoring system
=================

To enable monitoring and storage of snapshots in ``vtf_snapshots``, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_MONITORING` Kconfig option.
The rate for caching the snapshots is configured using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_SNAPSHOT_INTERVAL_MS` Kconfig option.
For optimal Wi-Fi performance, this should not be more than 10000 ms.
If no channels are configured for live updates, the defaults are stored in ``vtf_snapshots`` and no work queue items are created.

Live channel capture
====================

Each channel can capture new data asynchronously from the monitoring system's snapshot cache rate.
This allows other processes to use the captured data at higher rates, if required.
Currently, only die temperature supports live data reading.
Battery voltage and frequency offset live data capture will be added later.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. _vtf_monitoring:

VTF monitoring driver
#####################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The VTF (Voltage-Temperature-Frequency) monitoring driver fetches and stores data that the nRF Wi-Fi® driver uses to trigger re-calibrations or re-configurations of the Wi-Fi subsystem.

Reviewer: Adding ® for the second instance as first one is the name of the driver: https://ncsdoc.z6.web.core.windows.net/ncs/latest/nrf/drivers/wifi/nrf70_native.html#nrf-wi-fi-driver
```suggestion
The VTF (Voltage-Temperature-Frequency) monitoring driver fetches and stores data that the nRF Wi-Fi driver uses to trigger re-calibrations or re-configurations of the Wi-Fi® subsystem.
```

The driver maintains a periodic snapshot of the following three channels:

* Battery voltage - Supply voltage in millivolts (mV).

> * Die temperature - SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00 °C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Die temperature - SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00°C.
```

* XO frequency offset - Crystal oscillator frequency offset in parts per million (ppm).

Configuration
*************

Enable the monitoring system and select live or fixed channel data through Kconfig options.

Monitoring system
=================

To enable monitoring and storage of snapshots in ``vtf_snapshots``, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_MONITORING` Kconfig option.
The rate for caching the snapshots is configured using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_SNAPSHOT_INTERVAL_MS` Kconfig option.
For optimal Wi-Fi performance, this should not be more than 10000 ms.
If no channels are configured for live updates, the defaults are stored in ``vtf_snapshots`` and no work queue items are created.

Live channel capture
====================

> Each channel can capture new data asynchronously to the monitoring systems snapshot cache rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each channel can capture new data asynchronously from the monitoring system's snapshot cache rate.
```

> This allows other processes to make use of the captured data at faster rates if required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows other processes to use the captured data at higher rates, if required.
```

Currently, only die temperature supports live data reading.
Battery voltage and frequency offset live data capture will be added later.

To enable live data capture, valid ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions must be provided to ``VTF_CHANNEL_DEFINE`` and enabled using, for example, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR` Kconfig option.

* ``init()``:

    * Called once during ``SYS_INIT`` at application priority.
    * Bring up any hardware or state needed for sampling.

>     * Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Brings up any hardware or state needed for sampling.
    * Returns ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
```

>     * A failed init causes the channel to fall back to its default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * On failure, the channel falls back to its default value.
```

* ``sample(out)``:

    * Fill ``out`` with the latest reading for the channel.
    * Set ``out->type`` to match the value field used.
    * Set ``out->status`` to ``VTF_STATUS_OK`` when the reading is valid, or ``VTF_STATUS_ERROR``/ ``VTF_STATUS_UNINITIALISED`` otherwise.
    * Update ``out->timestamp_ms`` with ``k_uptime_get()`` when appropriate.

>     * Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Fills ``out`` with the latest reading for the channel.
    * Sets ``out->type`` to match the value field used.
    * Sets ``out->status`` to ``VTF_STATUS_OK`` when the reading is valid, or ``VTF_STATUS_ERROR``/ ``VTF_STATUS_UNINITIALISED`` otherwise.
    * Updates ``out->timestamp_ms`` with ``k_uptime_get()`` when appropriate.
    * Returns ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
```

Die temperature
---------------

Use the following Kconfig options to enable and configure the die temperature monitoring:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR_INTERVAL_MS`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR_INTERVAL_MS`
```

Battery voltage
---------------

Live data capture will be added at a later date.

Frequency offset
----------------

> Live data capture will be added at a later date.

Reviewer: This part could be converted as a Note:

.. note::
   Live data capture for battery voltage and frequency offset will be added later.

Reviewer: It seems this is not implemented. Lines 67-75 could be converted into a note.

Default values
==============

> When a channel does not have live monitoring enabled, the snapshot holds a compile-time default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a channel does not have live monitoring enabled, the snapshot holds a compile-time default value.
```

> If no channels use live updates, no work queue items are created and the defaults are held in ``vtf_snapshots``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no channels use live updates, no work queue items are created and the default values are held in ``vtf_snapshots``.
```

For the default values, see the following Kconfig options:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_BATTERY_VOLTAGE_DEFAULT_VALUE`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_DIE_TEMP_DEFAULT_VALUE`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_FREQ_OFFSET_DEFAULT_VALUE`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Custom channel backends
=======================

Each channel has a reference implementation, for example, :file:`temperature_monitor.c`.

> If the application needs to make use of one of these channels beyond the requirements for Wi-Fi, applications can replace any channel backend by supplying their own stronger ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the application needs to use one of these channels beyond the requirements for Wi-Fi, applications can replace any channel backend by supplying their own stronger ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions.
```

.. code-block:: c

   #include "temperature_monitor.h"

   int die_temp_init(void)
   {
       /* Configure sensor and fetch data regularly */
       return 0;
   }

   int die_temp_sample(struct vtf_sample *out)
   {
       out->type = VTF_SAMPLE_TYPE_INT;
       out->value.i32 = /* centi-degC */;
       out->timestamp_ms = k_uptime_get();
       out->status = VTF_STATUS_OK;
       return 0;
   }

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. _vtf_monitoring:

VTF monitoring driver
#####################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The VTF (Voltage / Temperature / Frequency) monitoring driver fetches and stores data that the nRF Wi-Fi driver uses to trigger re-calibrations / re-configurations of the Wi-Fi subsystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The VTF (Voltage-Temperature-Frequency) monitoring driver fetches and stores data that the nRF Wi-Fi® driver uses to trigger re-calibrations or re-configurations of the Wi-Fi subsystem.
```

> The driver maintains a periodic snapshot of three channels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The driver maintains a periodic snapshot of the following three channels:
```

* **Battery voltage** — supply voltage in millivolts (mV).
* **Die temperature** — SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00 °C.

> * **XO frequency offset** — crystal oscillator frequency offset in parts per million (ppm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Battery voltage - Supply voltage in millivolts (mV).
* Die temperature - SoC die temperature in centi-degrees Celsius (centi-degC); for example, ``2500`` represents 25.00 °C.
* XO frequency offset - Crystal oscillator frequency offset in parts per million (ppm).
```

Configuration
*************

Enable the monitoring system and select live or fixed channel data through Kconfig options.

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extra empty line.

Monitoring System

> ================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Monitoring system
=================
```

> To enable monitoring and storage of snapshots in `vtf_snapshots` use :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_MONITORING`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable monitoring and storage of snapshots in ``vtf_snapshots``, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_MONITORING` Kconfig option. 
```

The rate at which snapshots are cached is configured with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_SNAPSHOT_INTERVAL_MS`. For optimal Wi-Fi performance this should not be more than 10000ms.

> If no channels are configured for live updates the defaults are stored in `vtf_snapshots` and no work queue items are created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rate for caching the snapshots is configured using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_SNAPSHOT_INTERVAL_MS` Kconfig option.
For optimal Wi-Fi performance, this should not be more than 10000 ms.
If no channels are configured for live updates, the defaults are stored in ``vtf_snapshots`` and no work queue items are created.
```

Live Channel Capture

> ===================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Live channel capture
====================
```

Each channel can capture new data asynchronously to the monitoring systems snapshot cache rate. This allows other processes to make use of the captured data at faster rates if required.

> Currently, only die temperature supports live data reading. Battery voltage and frequency offset live data capture will be added at a later date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each channel can capture new data asynchronously to the monitoring systems snapshot cache rate.
This allows other processes to make use of the captured data at faster rates if required.
Currently, only die temperature supports live data reading.
Battery voltage and frequency offset live data capture will be added later.
```

> To enable live data capture, valid `init()` and `sample()` functions must be provided to VTF_CHANNEL_DEFINE and enabled via Kconfig e.g. :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable live data capture, valid ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions must be provided to ``VTF_CHANNEL_DEFINE`` and enabled using, for example, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR` Kconfig option.
```

``init()``
  Called once during ``SYS_INIT`` at application priority.
  Bring up any hardware or state needed for sampling.
  Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
  A failed init causes the channel to fall back to its default value.

``sample(out)``
  Fill *out* with the latest reading for the channel.
  Set ``out->type`` to match the value field used.
  Set ``out->status`` to ``VTF_STATUS_OK`` when the reading is valid, or ``VTF_STATUS_ERROR`` / ``VTF_STATUS_UNINITIALISED`` otherwise.
  Update ``out->timestamp_ms`` with ``k_uptime_get()`` when appropriate.

>   Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``init()``:

    * Called once during ``SYS_INIT`` at application priority.
    * Bring up any hardware or state needed for sampling.
    * Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
    * A failed init causes the channel to fall back to its default value.

* ``sample(out)``:

    * Fill ``out`` with the latest reading for the channel.
    * Set ``out->type`` to match the value field used.
    * Set ``out->status`` to ``VTF_STATUS_OK`` when the reading is valid, or ``VTF_STATUS_ERROR``/ ``VTF_STATUS_UNINITIALISED`` otherwise.
    * Update ``out->timestamp_ms`` with ``k_uptime_get()`` when appropriate.
    * Return ``0`` on success, or a negative ``errno`` value on failure.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extra empty line.

Die Temperature

> --------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Die temperature
---------------
```

Reviewer 2: You might want to add some intro text before the Kconfig options. For example, something like:

Use the following Kconfig options to enable and configure the die temperature monitoring:

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`
  Enable reference implementation live die-temperature monitoring using the on-chip temperature sensor.
  Selects :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_MONITORING`, :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SENSOR`, and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TEMP_NRF5`.

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR_INTERVAL_MS`
  Interval between die-temperature sensor reads, in milliseconds.
  Default: ``10000``.

>   Available when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR` is set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CONFIG_DIE_TEMP_MONITOR_INTERVAL_MS`
```
I'd say the necessary related info comes from the Kconfig file.

Battery Voltage

> --------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Battery voltage
---------------
```

Live data capture will be added at a later date.

Frequency Offset

> ---------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Frequency offset
----------------
```

Live data capture will be added at a later date.

Default values
==============

When a channel does not have live monitoring enabled, the snapshot holds a compile-time default.

> If no channels use live updates, no work queue items are created and the defaults are held in `vtf_snapshots`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If no channels use live updates, no work queue items are created and the defaults are held in ``vtf_snapshots``.
For the default values, see the following Kconfig options:
```

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_BATTERY_VOLTAGE_DEFAULT_VALUE`
  Default battery voltage in mV.
  Default: ``3300`` (3.3 V).

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_DIE_TEMP_DEFAULT_VALUE`
  Default die temperature in centi-degC.
  Default: ``2500`` (25.00 °C).

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_FREQ_OFFSET_DEFAULT_VALUE`
  Default XO frequency offset in ppm.

>   Default: ``100``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_BATTERY_VOLTAGE_DEFAULT_VALUE`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_DIE_TEMP_DEFAULT_VALUE`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_VTF_FREQ_OFFSET_DEFAULT_VALUE`
```

Custom channel backends
=======================

Whilst each channel has a reference implementation e.g. :file:`temperature_monitor.c`.

> In the event the application needs to make use of one of these channels beyond the requirements for Wi-Fi, applications can replace any channel backend by supplying their own stronger ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each channel has a reference implementation, for example, :file:`temperature_monitor.c`.
If the application needs to make use of one of these channels beyond the requirements for Wi-Fi, applications can replace any channel backend by supplying their own stronger ``init()`` and ``sample()`` functions.
```

.. code-block:: c

   #include "temperature_monitor.h"

   int die_temp_init(void)
   {
       /* Configure sensor and fetch data regularly */
       return 0;
   }

   int die_temp_sample(struct vtf_sample *out)
   {
       out->type = VTF_SAMPLE_TYPE_INT;
       out->value.i32 = /* centi-degC */;
       out->timestamp_ms = k_uptime_get();
       out->status = VTF_STATUS_OK;
       return 0;
   }

API documentation
*****************

| Header file: :file:`drivers/vtf_monitoring/vtf_monitoring.h`
| Die-temperature header: :file:`drivers/vtf_monitoring/temperature_monitor.h`

> | Source files: :file:`drivers/vtf_monitoring/vtf_capture.c`, :file:`drivers/vtf_monitoring/temperature_monitor.c`

Reviewer 2: If you wish to generate the API documentation, add

``.. doxygengroup:: name_of_your_defgroup``

And in the header file, add:

``* @defgroup name_of_your_defgroup VTF monitoring``

For an example, see https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/refs/heads/main/doc/nrf/libraries/debug/etb_trace.rst and the related header file.
